docs(alerting): when alerts need an SLO (#122851)
grafana/grafana: docs/sources/alerting/guides/when-slos-reduce-alert-noise.md

menuTitle: When SLOs reduce alert noise
weight: 1040
refs:
  design-alerts-for-first-responders-and-clear-actions:
    - pattern: /docs/grafana/
      destination: /docs/grafana/<GRAFANA_VERSION>/alerting/guides/best-practices/#design-alerts-for-first-responders-and-clear-actions
    - pattern: /docs/grafana-cloud/
      destination: /docs/grafana-cloud/alerting-and-irm/guides/best-practices/#design-alerts-for-first-responders-and-clear-actions
  prioritize-symptoms-but-dont-ignore-infrastructure-signals:
    - pattern: /docs/grafana/
      destination: /docs/grafana/<GRAFANA_VERSION>/alerting/guides/best-practices/#prioritize-symptoms-but-dont-ignore-infrastructure-signals
    - pattern: /docs/grafana-cloud/
      destination: /docs/grafana-cloud/alerting-and-irm/guides/best-practices/#prioritize-symptoms-but-dont-ignore-infrastructure-signals
  mitigate-flapping-alerts:
    - pattern: /docs/grafana/
      destination: /docs/grafana/<GRAFANA_VERSION>/alerting/guides/best-practices/#mitigate-flapping-alerts
    - pattern: /docs/grafana-cloud/
      destination: /docs/grafana-cloud/alerting-and-irm/guides/best-practices/#mitigate-flapping-alerts
---

# When SLOs reduce alert noise

> As your alerting grows in production, not every alert works as expected. Sometimes, they fire too often or resolve immediately before anyone responds. You start wondering if the problem is the alert.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As your configured alerts grow in production, you may find that not every alert works as expected. Sometimes they fire too often, or they resolve immediately before anyone responds. You may wonder if the problem is the alert.
```
Minor readability tweaks. 
Is "configured alerts" the right phrase for the first sentence? Using "alerting" in the first sentence doesn't quite work because isn't really a proper noun.

Author: addressed by https://github.com/grafana/grafana/pull/122851/commits/f410fd985629c476c8d992943822ac015cf202e3

> When this happens, the instinct is to tune the query or threshold, or maybe just delete it. Sometimes the alert is telling you that you're measuring reliability wrong, and implementing [service level objectives (SLOs)](/docs/grafana-cloud/alerting-and-irm/slo/introduction/) can be the right answer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When this happens, your instinct may be to tune the query or threshold, or maybe just delete it. Sometimes the alert is telling you that you're measuring reliability wrong, and implementing [service level objectives (SLOs)](/docs/grafana-cloud/alerting-and-irm/slo/introduction/) could be the right answer.
```

> This guide covers the three most common patterns where SLOs can help reduce alert noise and improve reliability coverage, and how to recognize them in your own setup.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This guide covers the three most common patterns where SLOs can help reduce alert noise, improve reliability coverage, and how to recognize the need for them in your own setup.
```

In this sense, the alert state is binary: firing or not firing.

{{< figure src="/media/docs/alerting/slog-guide-alert-state-lifecycle.png" max-width="750px" alt="States of alert instances over time" >}}

SLOs don't focus primarily on whether the service is healthy right now. They measure whether your service is **reliable over a long period**, for a week or several weeks, not at a point in time. For instance:

- An alert asks: over the past 10 minutes, did 50% of requests respond in under 3s?

- An SLO asks a similar question over a longer window: over the past 4 weeks, did 95% of requests respond in under 3 seconds?

Alerts can also use long evaluation periods, but they reset when the service recovers.

SLOs track failures against the [error budget](/grafana-cloud/alerting-and-irm/slo/introduction/#error-budget) even when the service recovers. They record how much degradation has accumulated, and report how much failure is still allowed.

{{< figure src="/media/docs/alerting/slo-guide-remaining-error-budget-panel.png" max-width="750px" alt="SLO error budget" >}}

> Another key difference is [SLO alerts](/grafana-cloud/alerting-and-irm/slo/set-up/configure-burn-rate-notifications/#burn-rate-alert-rule-conditions). Rather than firing when the error budget is consumed and the objective is breached, they **fire when the objective is at risk**.

Reviewer: ⚠The first sentence in line 62 isn't a full sentence.

Author: addressed by https://github.com/grafana/grafana/pull/122851/commits/9446a3a45b9bb9be14eb0909c9c288576e06b114

Sometimes deleting the alert is the right call if there's no commitment or SLI to anchor to a valid SLO. But if the same metric keeps surfacing in post-mortems across teams, that's a different signal that points to a shared reliability concern.

## The alert reflects a shared reliability concern

Sometimes, multiple teams maintain alerts for the same user-facing metric such as service response times, each applying their own thresholds and internal metrics for their services, but lacking an objective to evaluate the end-to-end user experience.

This sometimes results in overlapping alerts covering the same signal.

When distinct teams define their own thresholds for service performance or user-experience metrics, this reveals a shared user-experience concern that hasn't been made explicit.

In other cases, the SLO is driven by the business, such as a customer commitment or service level agreement (SLA). An SLO formalizes it as a shared objective tracked against what customers expect.

Before creating a shared SLO, teams need to agree on clear ownership.

> In both cases, the shift is often from internal metrics to user-facing reliability metrics, as recommended in [prioritize symptoms over causes](ref:prioritize-symptoms-but-dont-ignore-infrastructure-signals).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In both cases, the shift is often from internal metrics to user-facing reliability metrics, as recommended in the best practices documentation on how to [prioritize symptoms over causes](ref:prioritize-symptoms-but-dont-ignore-infrastructure-signals).
```

Author: addressed by https://github.com/grafana/grafana/pull/122851/commits/9259364c5019025f308bf5e5329f0cedb0dda7c7
